---
layout: api
title: Util
abstract: The Util module contains utility functions used throughout Airlift.
author: Bediako George
prose_link:
  http://prose.io/#substance/substance.github.com/edit/master/_posts/apis/0100-01-04-util.md
- apis
published: true
---

**Substance Document** helps with the *creation* and *transformation* of digital documents. It ensures *consistency*, separates *content* from *presentation* and provides an easy to use API. It depicts the heart of the Substance Platform, a set of tools for content creation and distribution.

A Substance Document can range from loosly structured content involving headings and text, such as reports or articles to more complex things that you wouldn’t consider a traditional document anymore. The format is designed to be extensible, so you can create your own flavors of documents. We put a lot of thought into the design of this module. This first release is a result of more than 6 months of research and development, so we're looking forward to your feedback.


# Play with the Console

Without too much talking, just have a look yourself. The Substance Console allows you to explore some examples and to mess around with the document manipulation protocol in a playful manner.

<iframe width="800" height="600" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="http://interior.substance.io/document/">
</iframe>


# Design goals

- A document consists of a sequence of content nodes of different types (e.g. heading, text, image)
- A document is manipulated through atomic **operations**
- The **history** is tracked, so users reconstruct previous document states at any time
- Support for incremental text updates, using a protocol similar to [Google Wave](http://www.waveprotocol.org/whitepapers/operational-transform)
- Support for text **annotations** that are not part of the content, but rather an overlay
- Support for **comments** to have dicussions on three levels (document, node, and also on a particular text annotation)


# Getting started

This section is intended to be a step to step guide on how to use the module to programmatically create and transform digital documents of any kind.

### Start tracking a new document.

    var doc = new Substance.Document({ id: "document:substance" });

### First off, let's specify a human readable title for our document

    var op = ["set", {"title": "Substance" }];

    doc.apply(op, {"user": "michael"});

### Add a first heading to our document.

    var opA = ["insert", {
      "id": "heading:1",
      "type": "heading",
      "target": "back",
      "data": { "content": "Hello" }
    }];

    doc.apply(opA, {"user": "michael"});


### Now let's add another node, this time a text node.

This operation is pretty similar to the previous one, except this time we specify `text` as our type.


    var opB = ["insert", {
      "id": "text:2",
      "type": "text",
      "data": { "content": "Hey there." }
    }];

    doc.apply(opB, {"user": "michael"});


### Update an existing node

There's a special API for incrementally updating existing nodes. This works by specifying a delta operation describing only what's changed in the text.

    var opC = ["update", {
        "id": "heading:1",
        "data": [5, " world!"]
    }];

    doc.apply(opC, {"user": "michael"});

### Inspect the document state

Now after executing a bunch of operations, it is a good time to inspect the `content` property of our document, which always reflects the current state.

    {
      "head": "heading:1",
      "tail": "text:2"
      "properties": {"title": "Substance"},
      "nodes": {
        "heading:1": {
          "content": "Hello world!",
          "id": "heading:1",
          "type": "heading",
          "prev": null,
          "next": "text:2"
        },
        "text:2": {
          "content": "Hey there.",
          "id": "text:2",
          "type": "text",
          "prev": "heading:1",
          "next": null
        }
      },
      "annotations": {},
      "comments": {}
    }

As you can see there are two nodes registered, which can be directly accessed by their `id`. In order to reflect the order of our nodes each of them knows about its `next` and `prev` sibling. On the document level there's two additional properties `head` and `tail`, which point to the beginning and the end of the document.


### History

But we don't only have access to the current state, the document model keeps track of all operations that have been executed.


    doc.toJSON();


Now this is the slightly more verbose output of the complete history of that same document. It wraps every operation in a commit object, each having a GUID as well as a reference to the previous commit.

    {
      "refs": {
        "master": "f7bd8120adb16d179c454ce57b57b50d"
      },
      "operations": {
        "1b6544d5f9724c33aa8dbb5becc51c0d": {
          "op": [
            "insert",
            {
              "id": "section:1",
              "type": "section",
              "target": "back",
              "data": {"content": "Hello"}
            }
          ],
          "user": "michael",
          "sha": "1b6544d5f9724c33aa8dbb5becc51c0d"
        },
        "b0595f2d3863db5ecd82d43e7ec05da0": {
          "op": [
            "insert",
            {
              "id": "text:2",
              "type": "text",
              "target": "back",
              "data": {"content": "Hey there."}
            }
          ],
          "user": "michael",
          "sha": "b0595f2d3863db5ecd82d43e7ec05da0",
          "parent": "1b6544d5f9724c33aa8dbb5becc51c0d"
        },
        "f7bd8120adb16d179c454ce57b57b50d": {
          "op": ["update", {"id": "section:1", "data": [5," world!"]}],
          "user": "foouser",
          "sha": "f7bd8120adb16d179c454ce57b57b50d",
          "parent": "b0595f2d3863db5ecd82d43e7ec05da0"
        }
      },
      "additions": {},
      "id": "doc:hello"
    }


### Time travel

Keep in mind, we can always look back. According to the commit graph shown above, we can checkout any reference in our document.

    doc.checkout("1b6544d5f9724c33aa8dbb5becc51c0d");

When using the Substance Console and exploring the history, this is what happens behind the curtain.

### Construct an existing document

Alternatively, you can pass in the history of an existing document, by providing all operations that happenend on that document, which are used to reconstruct the latest document state.

The document must come in this format.

    var docSpec = {
      "id": "DOCUMENT_ID",
      "commits": {...}, // Commit history containing all operations applied on that document
      "additions": {...} // Assigns to certain commits document additions, such as annotations and comments
    }

    var doc = new Substance.Document(docSpec);

## Annotations

So far, we have a bare-metal digital document, containing two different types of content nodes. Now we'd also like to store additional contextual information, relevant to a particular portion of text within the document.

Unlike in other systems with Substance annotations are not part of the content itself. They're completely separated from the text. Most text editors offer the ability to emphasize portions of text using markup. E.g. in HTML it looks like this.

    <em>Emphasized term</em> in a text body.

In Substance however, we keep annotations external and remember the position of the first character, as well as an offset (how many characters are effected). An annotation emphasizing the "Hey" in "Hey there." looks like so:

    {id: "annotation:23", type: "em", node: "text:2", "pos": [0,3]}

### Insert annotation

Like document content, annotations are manipulated through operations.

    var op1 = ["insert", {"id": "em:1", "type": "em", "node": "section:1", "pos": [0,3]}];
    document.apply(op1, {scope: "annotation"});

## Comments

Substance has in mind the usecase of collaborative composition of documents. Thus it allows a lively discussion during the editing process.

Comments can either refer to the document itself, to a certain content node, or stick on an annotation object. This allows a discussion on three levels. While viewing the document reveals the general discussion, discussions about specific portions can be shown contextually.


### Insert comment

Like everything, adding a comment needs to be done by specifying an operation.

    ["insert", {"id": "comment:a", "node": "section:1", "content": "Shouldn't you add exclamation mark here?"}]

# API

### Constructor

    var doc = new Substance.Document({id: "document:hello-world"});

### Checkout revision

Usage: `doc.checkout(ref)`

    doc.checkout('master'); // Checkout master
    doc.checkout('1b6544d5f9724c33aa8dbb5becc51c0d'); // Checkout a given sha

### Apply Operation

Usage: `doc.apply(op, [options])`

    doc.apply(["delete", {"id": "comment:25"}], {scope: "comment", "user": "michael"})

### List annotations

Usage: `doc.annotations(node)`

    doc.annotations('text:25');

### List comments
    
Usage: `doc.comments([node], [annotation])`

    doc.comments(); // Comments on Document Level
    doc.comments('text:25'); // Comments on Document Level
    doc.comments('text:25', 'em:54'); // Comments for a particular annotation

## Document Operations

### Insert Node

Parameters:

- `id` - Unique ID of the element
- `type` - Type of the new node
- `data` (optional) - All properties that need to be stored on the node
- `target` (optional) - Can either be 'front', 'back' or the id of a target node. Defaults to 'back'.

Inserting a text node.

    ["insert", {
      "id": "text:25",
      "type": "type",
      "data": { "content": "Hello" }
    }];

### Update Node

Parameters:

- `id` - ID of the node to be updated
- `properties` (optional) - Properties with new values
- `data` (optional) - Either a property hash or a delta, describing an incremental text update


Updating properties.

    ["update", {
      "id": "text:2",
      "data": { "content": "Hello" }
    }]

Incremental text update:

    ["update", {
      "id": "text:2",
      "data": [5, " world!"]
    }]


### Move Node(s)

Parameters:

- `nodes` - Node selection that should be moved to a new location
- `target` - Target node, selection will be appended here

Moving two text nodes to their new position.

    ["move", {
      "nodes": ["text:4", "text:5"],
      "target": "text:25"
    }]

### Delete Node(s)

Parameters:

- `nodes` - Node selection that should be removed from the document

Deleting a text node.

    ["delete", {"nodes": ["text:3"]}]

## Annotation Operations

In order to apply annotation operations to a document, use the `Document.apply` but with specifying the annotation scope.

    doc.apply(op, {scope: "annotation"});

### Insert annotation

Parameters:

- `id` - Unique ID of the annotation
- `type` - Annotation type
- `node` - ID of the referred content node.
- `pos` Character start index and offset.

Inserting a marker.

    ["insert", {"id": "mark:1", "type": "mark", "node": "section:1", "pos": [0,3]}]


### Update annotation

Parameters:

- `id` - Unique ID of the annotation to be updated
- `type` (optional) - Annotation type
- `node` (optional) - ID of the referred content node.
- `pos` (optional) Character start index and offset.

Update position of an existing marker

    ["update", {"id": "mark:1", "pos": [0,15]}]


### Delete annotation

Parameters:

- `id` - ID of the annotation that be removed from the document

Deleting an annotation.

    ["delete", { "id": "mark:1"}]


## Comment Operations

In order to apply comment operations to a document, use the Document.apply but with specifying the comment scope.

    doc.apply(op, {scope: "comment"});


### Insert comment

Parameters:

- `id` - Unique ID of new comment
- `node` - ID of the referred content node.
- `annotation` (optional) - Refer to inline annotation
- `content` (optional) - The actual comment

Insert a new comment.

    ["insert", {"id": "comment:a", "node": "text:2", "content": "A way of saying helo.", "annotation": "suggestion:1"}]

### Update comment

Parameters:

- `id` - Comment ID
- `node` (optional) - ID of the referred content node.
- `annotation` (optional) ID of associated inline annotation.

Update content of existing comment.

    ["update", {"id": "comment:a", "content": "A way of saying hello."}]


### Delete comment

Parameters:

- `id` - ID of comment to be deleted

Delete a comment by id.

    ["delete", { "id": "comment:a"}]